doc: add entry on Oppen's algorithm (#53)
Faveod/oppen-ruby: docs/oppen_algorithm.md

while an inconsistent group does not propagate the new line.

## The algorithm

The algorithm can be divided into two parts: the `scanning` and the `printing`. As their name implies, the former adds new tokens into our buffers/stacks (expanding to the right) while the latter pushes onto our `print stack` the tokens from the bottom of our buffers (shrinking from the left).
We scan until the current length of the line is greater or equal than the maximum desired width, then we will keep on pushing onto the `print stack` the tokens that we pop from our `tokens queue` while their correspondong `size buffer` value is greater than 0.

### Scan stack

The `scan stack` saves the locations of all the `BEGIN`, `END`, and `BREAK` tokens, allowing the algorithm to quickly access the last `BREAK` tokens and the groups they belong to.

### Print stack
The `print stack` handles the display of the tokens, taking into account the current indentation and the available space left on the line.
It saves only the `BEGIN` tokens, the other tokens are only printed to the output.

### Tokens queue

The `tokens queue`'s saves the scanned tokens that are not pushed yet to the `print stack`.

> 

Reviewer: This is a weird way to formulate it. Why aren't they pushed yet to the print stack? Does it contain things from the scan stack in the `printing phase` ?

### Size buffer

The `size buffer` stores at the `idx` position:
  - The width of the token if it is a `STRING` token.
  - The required width to print the previous tokens on the line until this point as a negative otherwise.

> Since there is no need to compute the exact size of the line if it is greater than the maximum desired width, we add `∞` in the `size buffer` instead.

Reviewer: Why do I care about the `idx` position?

### How it works

Here is a step by step execution of the algorithm using the example below.
```
[
  BEGIN#1,
  STRING#1 = 'Hello',
  BREAK    = ', ',
  STRING#2 = 'World!!!!!',

  BEGIN#2,
  LINE_BREAK,
  STRING#3 = 'GoodBye, ',
  STRING#4 = 'World!!!!!',
  END#1,

  END#2,

  EOF,
]
```

By processing the tokens one by one until `STRING#3`, we will get the following values in our data structures:
```
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+----------+---------+-----------+----------+
| tokens_queue | BEGIN#1 | STRING#1 | BREAK | STRING#2 | BEGIN#2 | LINEBREAK | STRING#3 |
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+----------+---------+-----------+----------+
| size_buffer  |   -1    |    5     |  -6   |    10    |   -18   |    -18    |    9     |
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+----------+---------+-----------+----------+

+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| scan_stack  |   0   |   2   |   4   |   5   |
+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
```

> 

Reviewer: I think it's a bad idea to:

1. Not indicate the desired width
2. Start with filled stacks and buffers. The size buffer is especially confusing.
3. Skip the print stack.

| tokens_queue | BREAK | STRING#2 | BEGIN#2 | LINEBREAK | STRING#3 |
+--------------+-------+----------+---------+-----------+----------+
| size_buffer  |  -6   |    10    |   -18   |    -18    |    9     |
+--------------+-------+----------+---------+-----------+----------+

+-------------+-------+-------+-------+
| scan_stack  |   2   |   4   |   5   |
+-------------+-------+-------+-------+
```

That process will keep on going until we flush the previous line and display `STRING#3` on a new line.

```
+--------------+
| tokens_queue |
+--------------+
| size_buffer  |
+--------------+

+-------------+
| scan_stack  |
+-------------+
```

Since `scan_stack` is empty, all the remaining tokens will directly be forwarded to the `print_stack` without having to pass by the other data structures.

```
Push STRING#4 to the print_stack.
Push END#1    to the print_stack.
Push END#2    to the print_stack.
Push EOF      to the print_stack.
```

## Our extensions

### Eager printing

We extended Oppen's algorithm to allow groups to be printed eagerly: we will try to flush the current line every time an `END` token is encountered.

> 

Reviewer: What's the problem we faced, and why we need this feature?

> ### Indent anchors
> 
> When nested groups are encountered, Oppen's algorithm anchors the next new line on the end of the previously displayed line. We extended the original algorithm in order to allow the anchor to be the current offset.
> 

Reviewer: Use an illustrating example.

```suggestion
### Indent anchors

Oppen described a single way to anchor the beginning of a new line: on the end of the previously displayed line. 

<!-- example -->

We added anchoring to the current offset. <!-- whatever current offset means -->

<!-- example -->

```

> ### Trim trailing whitespaces
> 
> Oppen's original work does not handle trailing whitespaces. We extended the algorithm to trim these trailing whitespaces.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Trim trailing whitespaces

It may have not been a concern to Oppen, but in a modern context, this is a nice feature to have, especially when running outputs through diff.

```

# Derek C. Oppen's pretty pritning algorithm

Derek C. Oppen's algorithm provides an efficient solution for formatting and printing code with clean indentation that respects a specified screen width.

When working with large blocks of code, ensuring proper indentation and alignment is crucial for readability and maintainability. However, achieving this while adhering to a specific line width can be a challenging task.

This algorithm is great if you are working with code, documentation, logging, or any situation that requires pretty-printing.

## The printing tokens

Oppen's algorithm expects a list of tokens describing the structure of the expected output.

The main tokens are:

|   Name    | Description
|-----------|------------
| STRING    | String literal to be displayed.
| BEGIN     | Opens a group.
| END       | Closes a group.

> | BREAK     | Potential line break (adds a new line if the text doesn't fit on the line).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| BREAK     | Potential line break. A literal space that can become a new line.
```

| LINEBREAK | Guaranteed line break.

A group can contain any number of groups, `String`, `Break`, and a `LineBreak`. Groups exist to containerize different _groups_ of tokens with respect to line breaking.

Containerizing groups allows the creation of subsets that are independent from other subsets, and semi-independent from their parent subsets.

> 

Reviewer: I don't like the semi-independant formulation. It's ambiguous. Besides, they are truely independant. The process chooses when to stop going up the parent chain, so from the perspective of a group, and from the perspective of the author of the group, the group itself is an independant unit with respect to breaking.

I think we can go without this sentence because it only adds confusion. Examples should clarify this idea.

> Example for a maximum desired printing width of 3:

Reviewer: Let's take an example to explain what we mean by containerizing groups with respect to line breaking.

Let's say we define our screen width to 3, and we want to print a simple group, with the following tokens:

> ```
> [
>   BEGIN#1, # Start of group 1
> 
>   STRING = 'a',
> 
>   BREAK#1,
>   STRING = 'b',
> 
>   BREAK#2,
>   STRING = 'c',
> 
>   END#1,   # end of group 1
> 
>   EOF
> ]
> 
> =>
> a
> b
> c
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
[BEGIN, STRING(a), BREAK, STRING(b), BREAK, STRING(c), END]
```

We just defined a group to print a line of width 5: 3 characters for the `STRING` tokens, and 2 for the `BREAK` which are literal spaces by default.

Since our desired line width is 3, we need to break the group. `BREAK`s are transformed into new lines, and we get:
```
a
b
c
```
````

> Now if we add one more group:
> ```
> [
>   BEGIN#1, # Start of group 1
> 
>   STRING = 'a',
> 
>   BEGIN#2, # Start of group 2
> 
>   BREAK#1,
>   STRING = 'b',
> 
>   END#2,   # end of group 2
> 
>   BREAK#2,
>   STRING = 'c',
> 
>   END#1,   # end of group 1
> 
>   EOF
> ]
> 
> =>
> a b
> c
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
If we introduce a new group as follows:
```
[BEGIN, STRING(a), 
    BEGIN, BREAK, STRING(b), END,
 BREAK, STRING(c), END]
```

We get:
```
a b
c
```

Instead of replacing all the spaces introduced by `BREAK` by an actual new line to fit a line of width 3, this configuration allowed us to break the outermost group only while keeping the inner `BREAK` (preceding `STRING('b')`) intact.
````

This is where the `printing` step kicks in. It steals tokens from the the `scan stack` and the `tokens queue`, and starts printing to the output buffer with the help of its `print stack`.

### Tokens queue

The `tokens queue` saves the tokens that we have already read from the input.

When `scanning`, every token read from the input will be automatically pushed to the `tokens queue`.
When `printing`, token are popped from the `tokens queue` and pushed into the `print stack`.

### Scan stack

The `scan stack` saves the indexes of all the `BEGIN`, `END`, and `BREAK` tokens in the `tokens queue`, giving quick access to `BREAK` tokens and the groups they belong to.

### Size buffer

The `size buffer` and the `tokens queue` grow simultaneously: every time a new token is read from the input it is first pushed to the `tokens queue`, and then we store in the `size buffer` an integer that depends on the type of the token:
- If it's a `STRING`, we store its width.
- Otherwise, we store the total width of the current line, as a negative value.
Since there is no need to compute the exact size of the line if it is greater than the maximum desired width, we add `∞` in the `size buffer` instead.

> 

Author: I forgot to remove it after I moved it.

  a new line is displayed otherwise.
- If a `END` token is pushed, we pop the stack that is holding the `BEGIN` tokens.
- If a `STRING` token is pushed, we display the token's value. If it is the first `STRING` on the current line we indent before displaying the value.

### How it works

Here is a step by step execution of the algorithm using the example below for a maximum width of 80.
```
[
  BEGIN#1 offest = 0,
    STRING#1 = 'Hello',
    BREAK    = ', ',
    STRING#2 = 'World!!!!!',

    BEGIN#2 offset = 2,
      LINE_BREAK,
      STRING#3 = 'GoodBye',
    END#1,
  END#2,

  EOF,
]
```

The first token to be scanned is `BEGIN#1`.
```
+--------------+---------+
| tokens_queue | BEGIN#1 |
+--------------+---------+
| size_buffer  |   -1    |
+--------------+---------+

+-------------+-------+
| scan_stack  |   0   |
+-------------+-------+
```

The next token to be scanned is `STRING#1`.
```
+--------------+---------+----------+
| tokens_queue | BEGIN#1 | STRING#1 |
+--------------+---------+----------+
| size_buffer  |   -1    |    5     |
+--------------+---------+----------+

+-------------+-------+
| scan_stack  |   0   |
+-------------+-------+
```

> The next token to be scanned is `BREAK`.

Author: Actually we get 6 by doing `-(5 + 1)`. We push `right_total` into the size buffer, which is only updated on string and on break *after* pushing the value to the buffer.

+--------------+---------+----------+-------+
| size_buffer  |   -1    |    5     |  -6   |
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+

+-------------+-------+-------+
| scan_stack  |   0   |   2   |
+-------------+-------+-------+
```

The next token to be scanned is `STRING#2`.
```
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+----------+
| tokens_queue | BEGIN#1 | STRING#1 | BREAK | STRING#2 |
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+----------+
| size_buffer  |   -1    |    5     |  -6   |    10    |
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+----------+

+-------------+-------+-------+
| scan_stack  |   0   |   2   |
+-------------+-------+-------+
```

The next token to be scanned is `BEGIN#2`.
```
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+----------+---------+
| tokens_queue | BEGIN#1 | STRING#1 | BREAK | STRING#2 | BEGIN#2 |
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+----------+---------+
| size_buffer  |   -1    |    5     |  -6   |    10    |   -18   |
+--------------+---------+----------+-------+----------+---------+

+-------------+-------+-------+-------+
| scan_stack  |   0   |   2   |   4   |
+-------------+-------+-------+-------+

> ```

Author: -(1 + 5 + 2 + 10). Same explanation as before.

| print_stack | BEGIN#1 | BEGIN#2 |
+-------------+---------+---------+
Output:
------
Hello$
World!!!!!$
$
------

+--------------+----------+
| tokens_queue | STRING#3 |
+--------------+----------+
| size_buffer  |    9     |
+--------------+----------+

+-------------+
| scan_stack  |
+-------------+

Push STRING#3 to the print stack.

+-------------+---------+---------+
| print_stack | BEGIN#1 | BEGIN#2 |
+-------------+---------+---------+
Output:
------
Hello$
World!!!!!$
            GoodBye$
------

+--------------+
| tokens_queue |
+--------------+
| size_buffer  |
+--------------+

+-------------+
| scan_stack  |
+-------------+
```

Since `scan_stack` is empty, all the remaining tokens will directly be forwarded to the `print_stack` without having to pass by the other data structures.

```
Push END#1    to the print_stack.

+-------------+---------+
| print_stack | BEGIN#1 |
+-------------+---------+
Output:
------
Hello$
World!!!!!$
            GoodBye$
------

Push END#2    to the print_stack.

+-------------+
| print_stack |
+-------------+
Output:
------
Hello$
World!!!!!$
            GoodBye$
------
```

## Our extensions

### Eager printing

> Oppen's original work and `ruby/PretttPrint`'s output differed when chaining groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oppen's original work and `ruby/pretty_print`'s produced different outcomes when chaining groups.
```

> We extended Oppen's algorithm to allow groups to be printed eagerly: we will try to flush the current line every time an `END` token is encountered.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We added an optional extension to allow groups to be printed eagerly, where we try to flush the current line every time an `END` token is encountered.

```

Example for a maximum width of 13:
```

> [
>   BEGIN,
>     BEGIN,
>       STRING = 'abc', BREAK, STRING = 'def',
>     END,
> 
>     BEGIN,
>       STRING = 'ghi', BREAK, STRING = 'jkl',
>     END,
>   END,
> ]
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[
  BEGIN,
    BEGIN, STRING(abc), BREAK, STRING(def), END,
    BEGIN, STRING(ghi), BREAK, STRING(jkl), END,
  END,
]

```

Stay consistent with what we wrote at the beginning.

without eager printing =>
abc
defghi jkl

with eager printing =>
abc defghi
jkl
```

> 

Reviewer: Take out of the code block, and write them normally:

Without eager printing:
```
...
```

With eager printing:
```
...
```

### Indent anchors

Oppen described a single way to anchor the beginning of a new line: on the end of the previously displayed line.

```
[
  BEGIN,
    STRING = 'And she said:',
    BEGIN: offset = 4,
      BEGIN: offset = 4,
        LINEBREAK, STRING = 'Hello, World!',
      END,
    END,
  END,
]
=>
And she said:
                 Hello, World!
```

> 

Reviewer: Same as before.

> We added anchoring to the current offset.
> 
> ```
> And she said:
>         Hello, World!
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We added another optional extension to express anchoring to the current offset.

```
And she said:
        Hello, World!
```

```

### Trim trailing whitespaces

It may have not been a concern to Oppen, but in a modern context, this is a nice feature to have, especially when running outputs through diff.

### Upsized stacks

Oppen fixed the size of the print and scan stacks to `3 * maximum desired width` since we will always flush them when their content's width is greater or equal to the `maximum desired width`.

Here's a quick and dirty example that illustrates a bigger issue with this assumption:
```
[
  BEGIN,
    BEGIN,
      BEGIN,
        BEGIN,
          BEGIN,

>             STRING = 'Hello',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            STRING(Hello),
```

# Derek C. Oppen's pretty pritning algorithm

Derek C. Oppen's algorithm provides an efficient solution for formatting and printing code with clean indentation that respects a specified screen width.

When working with large blocks of code, ensuring proper indentation and alignment is crucial for readability and maintainability. However, achieving this while adhering to a specific line width can be a challenging task.

This algorithm is great if you are working with code, documentation, logging, or any situation that requires pretty-printing.

Reading Oppen's paper is indispensable to get all the details of his work, so what we're doing in this document is to explain his pretty-printing in simpler terms, relying on illustrative examples, acting as a companion to the paper.

## Table of Contents

> 1. [The Printing Tokens](#the-printing-tokens)

Reviewer 2: Well, it does.  In its one way, but it does.

<img width="1355" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b1eef1d2-9f47-4cec-91b0-71751cbaa972" />

Just click on the TOC icon on the top-right.
